# The Population Genetics of Divergence and Molecular Substitution.

> "History is just one damn thing after another." -sometimes attributed
> to Arnold Toynbee

There are over $30$ million base pair substitutions between human and
chimpanzees, sites where humans carry one allele and chimps another at
orthologous locations. These changes have occurred in the seven million
years or so since human and chimp last shared a common ancestor. Other
subsitutions are shared between the sister species human and chimp to
the exclusion of gorilla, yet others are shared between human, chimps
and Gorilla but not Orangs. Long-term evolution, from the molecular
perspective, is just one damn substitution after another. These
substitutions represent changes at just a small percentage of sites
genome-wide as we share the majority of our genome, our evolutionary
history, and our biology with the other great apes. Each of the
substitutions must have arisen as a mutation in the population, spread
through the population as a polymorphism before eventually reaching
fixation. What forces drove the spread of these alleles through the
population to become substitutions?

::: table*
  --------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Human `accacagcatttgttagttactgccaagaagcctgtatctgtagggtaaaatcctcgctgaagtgggttg`
                  Chimp `......................................g...........c...................`
                Gorilla `..................................................cc..................`
              Orangutan `.........c.........c..............................c...................`
                 Gibbon `...................c..............................â€”.................`
    Crab-eating macaque `g.............gg...c..............................c..t.t..............`
  --------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

Many substitutions were driven by selection, as there has undoubtedly
been plenty of adaptive phenotypic adaptive evolution in great apes.
However, these adaptive changes may be a small minority of all the
subsitutions, for a start many of these substitutions have occurred in
non-coding DNA with no known functional effect. Thus it is reasonable
initial position that the majority of substitutions genome-wide may well
be neutral. How can we hope to identify regions undergoing adaptive
divergence? How could we hope to address the claim that many amino-acid
changing substitutions are also neutral, as posited by the Neutral
theory of molecular evolution. One way forward is to understand what
neutral theory predicts for the rate of molecular substition, and then
develop ways to test these ideas.

::: center
![Illustration by Benjamin Waterhouse Hawkins from Huxley's "Evidence as
to Man's Place in Nature" (1863). Image from the
[wikimedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pithecometra_principle#/media/File:Huxley_-_Mans_Place_in_Nature.jpg),
public domain.
](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/Huxley_mans_place/Huxley_Mans_Place_in_Nature.jpg){#fig:Huxley_man
width="\\textwidth"}
:::

## The Neutral Substitution process.

So how then do neutral substitutions occur? It is very unlikely that a
rare neutral allele accidentally drifts up to fixation; more likely,
such an allele will be eventually lost from the population. However,
populations experience a large and constant influx of rare alleles due
to mutation, so even if it is very unlikely that an individual allele
fixes within the population, some neutral alleles will fix by chance. So
we'll need to understand the probability that a neutral mutation fixes,
and then how we can think about the rate of substitutions accumulate
over time.\

### probability of the eventual fixation of a neutral allele

::: center
![Each allele initially present in a small diploid population is given a
different colour so we can track their descendants over time. By the 9th
generation, all of the alleles present in the population can trace their
ancestry back to the orange allele.
](figures/Substitution_sim.png){#fig:subs_simulation
width="\\textwidth"}
:::

An allele which reaches fixation within a population is an ancestor to
the entire population. In a particular generation there can only be a
single allele that all other alleles at the locus in a later generation
can claim as an ancestor (See Figure
[1.2](#fig:subs_simulation){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:subs_simulation"}). At a neutral locus, the actual allele
does not affect the number of descendants that the allele has (this
follows from the definition of neutrality: neutral alleles don't leave
more or less descendants on average than other neutral alleles). An
equivalent way to state this is that the allele labels don't affect
anything; thus the alleles are *exchangeable*. As a consequence of being
exchangeable, any allele is equally likely to be the ancestor of the
entire population. In a diploid population of size $N$, there are $2N$
alleles, all of which are equally likely to be the ancestor of the
entire population at some later time point. So if our allele is present
in a single copy, the chance that it is the ancestor to the entire
population in some future generation is $\nicefrac{1}{(2N)}$, i.e. the
chance our neutral allele is eventually fixed is $\nicefrac{1}{(2N)}$.
In Figure [1.2](#fig:subs_simulation){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:subs_simulation"}, our orange allele in the first
generation is one of 10 differently coloured alleles, and so has a
$1/10$ chance of being the ancestor of the entire population at some
later time point (and in this simulation it does become the common
ancestor, by the 9th generation).\
More generally, if our neutral allele is present in $i$ copies in the
population, of $2N$ alleles, the probability that this allele becomes
fixed is $\nicefrac{i}{(2N)}$, i.e. the probability that a neutral
allele is eventually fixed is simply given by its frequency ($p$) in the
population. (We can also derive this result by letting
$Ns \rightarrow 0$ in eqn.
[\[eqn:prob_fixed\]](#eqn:prob_fixed){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eqn:prob_fixed"}, a result we'll encounter later.)

How long does it take on average for such an allele to fix within our
population? In developing equation
[\[TMRCA_neutral\]](#TMRCA_neutral){reference-type="eqref"
reference="TMRCA_neutral"} we've seen that it takes on average $4N$
generations for a large sample of alleles to all trace their ancestry
back to a single most recent common ancestral allele. Any single-base
pair change which arose as a single mutation at a locus, and fixed in
the population, must have been present in the sequence transmitted by
the most recent common ancestor of the population at that locus. Thus it
must take roughly $4N$ generations for a neutral allele present in a
single copy within the population to fix. This argument can be made more
precise, but in general we would still find that it takes $\approx 4N$
generations for a neutral allele to go from its introduction to fixation
with the population.\

### Rate of substitution of neutral alleles

A substitution between populations that do not exchange gene flow is
simply a fixation event within one population. The rate of substitution
is therefore the rate at which new alleles fix in the population, so
that the long-term substitution rate is the rate at which mutations
arise that will eventually become fixed within our population.\
Let's assume, based on our discussion of the neutral theory of molecular
evolution, that there are only two classes of mutational changes that
can occur with a region, highly deleterious mutations and neutral
mutations. A fraction $C$ of all mutational changes are highly
deleterious, and cannot possibly contribute to substitution nor
polymorphism. The other $1-C$ fraction of mutations are neutral. If our
total mutation rate is $\mu$ per transmitted allele per generation, then
a total of $2N \mu (1-C)$ neutral mutations enter our population each
generation.\
Each of these neutral mutations has a $\nicefrac{1}{(2N)}$ probability
chance of eventually becoming fixed in the population. Therefore, the
rate at which neutral mutations arise that eventually become fixed
within our population is $$2N\mu(1-C)\frac{1}{2N} = \mu(1-C)$$ Thus the
rate of substitution, under a model where newly arising alleles are
either highly deleterious or neutral, is simply given by the mutation
rate of neutral alleles, i.e. $\mu(1-C)$.\
Consider a pair of species that have diverged for $T$ generations, i.e.
orthologous sequences shared between the species last shared a common
ancestor $T$ generations ago. If these species have maintained a
constant $\mu$ over that time, they will have accumulated an average of
$$2\mu(1-C)T \label{eqn:moleclock}$$ neutral substitutions. This assumes
that $T$ is a lot longer than the time it takes to fix a neutral allele,
such that the total number of alleles introduced into the population
that will eventually fix is the total number of substitutions.\
This is a really pretty result as the population size has completely
canceled out of the neutral substitution rate. However, there is another
way to see this in a more straight forward way. If I look at a sequence
in me compared to, say, a particular chimp, I'm looking at the mutations
that have occurred in both of our germlines since they parted ways $T$
generations ago. Since neutral alleles do not alter the probability of
their transmission to the next generation, we are simply looking at the
mutations that have occurred in $2T$ generations worth of transmissions.
Thus the average number of neutral mutational differences separating our
pair of species is simply $2\mu (1-C) T$.\

### Implications for the Molecular Clock.

A number of observations follow under this model, from equation
[\[eqn:moleclock\]](#eqn:moleclock){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eqn:moleclock"}. The first is that a primary determinant of
patterns of molecular evolution in a genomic region is the level of
constraint ($C$). This pattern generally seems to hold empirically:
non-coding regions often evolve more rapidly than coding regions,
synonymous substitutions accumulate faster than nonsynonymous, and
nonsynonymous substitutions accumulate faster in less vital proteins
than ones that are absolutely necessary for early development. For
example, fibrinopeptides evolve in a less constrained manner than the
cytochrome c gene, see Figure
[1.3](#fig:Dickerson_mole_clock){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Dickerson_mole_clock"}. Note that this constraint
prediction is not a unique prediction of the neutral model, e.g. less
constrained regions may also be better able to evolve adaptively.
However, it is a fantastically useful general insight, e.g. it allows us
to spot putatively functional non-coding regions by looking for genomic
regions that have very low levels of divergence among distantly related
species.

::: center
![The numbers of substitutions in three proteins, corrected for multiple
hits, between various pairs of groups plotted against the time these
groups shared a common ancestor in the fossil record. Data from
@dickerson1971structure. The lines give the linear regression through
the origin for each protein. The slope of the regression is given next
to the protein name. See [@robinson2016revisiting] who revisited this
classic study and confirmed the
conclusions.](Journal_figs/genetic_drift/Molecular_clock_Dickerson/Dickerson_1979_mole_clock_fig.pdf){#fig:Dickerson_mole_clock
width="0.8 \\textwidth"}
:::

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/rattlesnake/rattlesnake.jpg){width="0.7 \\textwidth"}
:::
:::

The second important insight, and critical for the development of the
neutral theory, is that equation
[\[eqn:moleclock\]](#eqn:moleclock){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eqn:moleclock"} is seemingly consistent with
@zuckerkandl1965evolutionary's hypothesis of a surprisingly constant,
protein molecular clock. The protein molecular clock is the observation
that for some proteins there's a linear relationship between the number
of non-synonymous (NS) substitutions and the time species last shared a
common ancestor in the fossil record. @dickerson1971structure provided
an for early example of this observation (Figure
[1.3](#fig:Dickerson_mole_clock){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Dickerson_mole_clock"}), by comparing various organisms
whose molecular sequences were available to him. For example, he found
that humans and rattlesnakes, who last share a common ancestor in the
fossil record around 300 million years, are separated by roughly $15$ NS
substitutions per $100$ sites in the cytochrome c protein. While, humans
and dogfish, which diverged around 400 million years, are separated by
$19$ NS substitutions per $100$ sites in this gene.\

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/dogfish/dogfish.jpg){width="\\textwidth"}
:::
:::

In equation [\[eqn:moleclock\]](#eqn:moleclock){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eqn:moleclock"}, if we double the amount of time separating a
pair of species $T$, we double the number of substitutions predicted.
Note that for this to be true $T$ must be measured in generations. To
explain a protein molecular clock between species that clearly differed
dramatically in generation time it was hypothesized that the mutation
rate actually scaled with generation time, i.e. short-lived organisms
introduced fewer mutations per generation, e.g. as they had fewer rounds
of mitosis. This generation-time assumption meant that the mutation rate
per year could be constant, such that $\mu T$ would be a constant for
pairs of species that had diverged for similar geological times, which
are measured in years, even if the organisms differed in generation
time. This assumption would allow neutral theory to be consistent with a
protein molecular clock measured in years. We now know that this
critical generation time assumption is false: organisms with shorter
generation times have somewhat higher mutation rates per year so a
strict neutral model is inconsistent with the protein molecular clock.
We'll return to these ideas when we discuss the fate of very weakly
selected mutations in Chapter
[\[Selection_Stochasticity\]](#Selection_Stochasticity){reference-type="ref"
reference="Selection_Stochasticity"} and @ohta1973slightly's Nearly
Neutral theory. If you are still reading this send Graham a picture of
Tomoko Ohta receiving the Crafoord Prize, an analog of the Nobel prize
for biology, for her contributions to molecular evolution.

##### The contribution of ancestral polymorphism to divergence.

If we are considering $T$ to represent the divergence between
long-separated species, then we can think of $T$ as the time that the
species split. However, for more recently diverged populations and
species, we need to include the fact that the sorting of ancestral
polymorphism contributes to divergence among species. In Figure
[\[fig:split_anc_pop\]](#fig:split_anc_pop){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:split_anc_pop"}, we see our two populations split $T_s$
generations ago. However, the coalescence of our A and B lineage is
necessarily deeper in time than $T_s$. The top mutation was polymorphic
in the ancestral population but now contributes to the divergence
between A and B. Assuming that our ancestral population had effective
size $N_A$ individuals, and that our populations split cleanly with no
subsequent gene flow, then $$T = T_s + 2N_A.$$ If our species split time
is very large compared to $2N$ then we can think of $T$ as the split
time.

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](figures/Genetic_drift/ILS/split_anc_pop.pdf){width="0.8 \\textwidth"}
:::
:::

::: question
For this, and the next question, assume that humans and chimps split
around 5.5$\times 10^6$ years ago, have a generation time Â 20 years,
that the speciation occurred instantaneously in allopatry with no
subsequent gene flow, and the ancestral effective population size of the
human and chimp common ancestor population was 10,000 individuals.\
Nachman and Crowell sequenced 12 pseudogenes in humans and chimps and
found substitutions at 1.3% of sites.\
**A)** What is the mutation rate per site per generation at these
genes?\
**B)** All of the pseudogenes they sequenced are on the autosomes. What
would your prediction be for pseudogenes on the X and Y chromosomes,
given that few mutations occur in the female germline than in the male
germline per generation.
:::

## Tests of molecular evolution.

One of the great appeals of neutral models is they offer a simple null
for us to test real data against.

### Comparing the rates of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions $\dNdS$

One common tool in molecular evolution is to compare the estimated
number (or rates) of substitutions in different classes of genomic
sites, for example the ratio of the rates of non-synonymous ($d_N$) to
synonymous substitutions ($d_S$) in a given gene. The simplest way to
think about calculating $d_N$ is to count up the non-synonymous changes
and divide by the total number of positions in the gene where a
non-synonymous point mutation could occur and then divide by time. We
can do likewise for synonymous changes $d_S$, and then take the ratio
$\dNdS$.

For the vast majority of protein-coding genes in the genome we see that
$\dNdS < 1$. This observation is consistent with the view that
non-synonymous sites are much more constrained than synonymous sites,
i.e. that most non-synonymous mutations are deleterious and quickly
removed from the population. If we are willing to make the assumption
that all synonymous changes are neutral, $d_S= \mu$, then we can
estimate the degree of constraint on non-synonymous sites. (Note that
synonymous changes can sometimes be subject to both positive and
negative selection, but this neutral assumption is a useful starting
place.)

Assume that a fraction $C$ of non-synonymous changes are too deleterious
to contribute to divergence, and that there are no beneficial mutations.
Then, we expected rate of neutral non-synonymous substitutions is
$$d_N = (1-C) \mu$$ Dividing by $d_S$, we find $$\dNdS = (1-C)$$
Therefore, if we assume that non-synonymous mutations can only be
strongly deleterious or neutral, we estimate the fraction of mutational
changes that are constrained by negative selection as $C= 1- \dNdS$. C
has the interpretations of being the fraction of non-synonymous
mutations that are quickly weeded out of the population by selection,
and so do not contribute to divergence among species.

We can test whether our gene is evolving in a constrained way at the
protein level by estimating $\dNdS$ and testing whether this is
significantly less that $1$. A $\dNdS$ test can provide evolutionary
evidence that a stretch of DNA proposed to be protein-coding is subject
to selective constraint, and so likely does encode for a functional
protein. We can also perform a $\dNdS$ test on specific branches of a
phylogeny for a gene, to test on which branches the gene is subject to
constraint, or to test for changes in the level of constraint across the
phylogeny.

##### Loss of constraint at pseudogenes.

While most protein genes evolve under constraint, we can find examples
of genes that are evolving in a much less constrained manner. The
simplest example of this is where the gene has lost function. Genes can
lose function because of inactivating mutations that stop them being
transcribed or translated into functional proteins. Such genes are
called 'pseudogenes'. When a gene completely loses function there is no
longer selection against non-synonynous changes and so such mutations
are just as free to accumulate as synonymous changes, and so $\dNdS=1$.
Pseudogenes are a wonderful example of the extension of Darwin's ideas
about vestigial traits ('Rudimentary organs') to the DNA level; we can
still recognize a once useful word (gene) whose spelling is slowly
degrading. Our genomes are filled with old pseudogenes whose original
meanings (functional protein coding sequences) are slowly being eroded
through the accumulation of neutral substitutions. One nice example of a
gene that has repeatedly lost function, i.e. become repeatedly
psuedogenized, is the *enamlin* gene from the study of @Meredith:09.

::: center
![Examples of frameshift mutations (insertions blue, deletions red) and
premature stop codons in *enamlin* in Cetacea and Xenarthra. Figure from
@Meredith:09, .
](Journal_figs/genetic_drift/Enamelin/Enamlin.pdf){#fig:Enamlin_coding
width="\\textwidth"}
:::

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/sloth/20423856040_6e4360df9c_z.jpg){width="\\textwidth"}
:::
:::

The protein *enamlin* is a key structural protein involved in the outer
cap of enamel on teeth. Various mammals have secondarily evolved diets
that do not require hard teeth, and so greatly reduced the selection
pressure for hard enamel, or even teeth at all. For example, two-toed
sloths (*Choloepus*), pygmy sperm whales (*Kogia*), and aardvark
(*Orycteropus*) all lack enamel on teeth. Other mammals have lost their
teeth entirely, e.g. giant anteaters (*Myrmecophaga*) and baleen whales.
Due to this relaxation of constraint on the phenotype, the *enamlin*
gene has accumulated pseudogenizing substitutions such as premature stop
codons and frameshift mutations (see Figure
[1.4](#fig:Enamlin_coding){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Enamlin_coding"} for examples). @Meredith:09 sequenced
*enamlin* across a range of species and found that none of the species
with enamel have frameshift mutations in *enamlin*, while 17/20 of
species that lack enamel or teeth have frameshifts in *enamlin*, and all
of them carry premature stop codons.

@Meredith:09 found that the branches of the *enamlin* phylogeny with a
functional *enamlin* gene had an estimated $\dNdS=â€Š0.51$, consistent
with the protein evolving in a constrained manner. In contrast, the
branches with a pseudogenized Enamlin had $\dNdS = 1.02$, consistent
with the gene evolving a completely unconstrained way. The branches
where the gene was likely transitioning from a functional to
non-function state, i.e. pre-mutation and mixed, had intermediate values
of $\dNdS=0.83-0.98$, consistent with a transition from a constrained to
unconstrained mode of protein evolution somewhere along these branches
of the phylogeny.

::: center
![ A synthetic interpretation of the history of enamel degeneration in
*Tubulidentata* (the order of aardvarks) based on fossils,
phylogenetics, molecular clocks, frameshift mutations, and $\dNdS$
ratios. The oldest fossil aardvarks are *O. minutus* (19 mya) from the
early Miocene of Kenya and also lack enamel. Figure & caption modified
from @Meredith:09, .
](Journal_figs/genetic_drift/Enamelin/Aardvark_pseudogene.png){#fig:Aardvark_pseudogene
width="\\textwidth"}
:::

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/aardvark/20514695666_5a22b53b8c_h.jpg){width="\\textwidth"}
:::
:::

::: question
The *enamlin* gene was pseudogenized somewhere along the branch leading
to Aardvarks (*Orycteropus afer*), see Figure
[1.5](#fig:Aardvark_pseudogene){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Aardvark_pseudogene"}. @Meredith:09 estimated that this
branch has a $\dNdS=0.75$\
**A)** Calculate the average constraint against amino-acid changes on
this branch.\
**B)** Aardvarks last shared a common ancestor with *Afrosoricida*
(golden moles, tenrecs) and *Macroscelidea* (elephant shrews) around
$\sim 75.1$ million years ago in the Cretaceous. Assume that for the
portion of the branch while *enamlin* was functional $\dNdS = 0.51$ and
after it was pseudogenized there was no constaint (i.e. $\dNdS = 1$).
Based on the branch's average $\dNdS=0.75$, can you estimate the time at
which *enamlin* was pseudogenized? (I.e. when is the star in Figure
[1.5](#fig:Aardvark_pseudogene){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Aardvark_pseudogene"}?)
:::

##### Adaptive evolution and $\dNdS$.

Clearly genes are not only subject to neutral and deleterious mutations;
beneficial mutations must also arise and fix from from time to time.
Let's assume that a fraction $B$ of non-synonymous mutations that arise
are beneficial such that $2 N \mu B$ beneficial mutations arise per
generation. Newly arisen beneficial alleles are not destined to fix in
the population, as they may be lost to genetic drift when they are rare
in the population (we'll discuss how to calculate the fixation
probability for beneficial alleles in Chapter
[\[Selection_Stochasticity\]](#Selection_Stochasticity){reference-type="ref"
reference="Selection_Stochasticity"}). A newly arisen beneficial allele
reaches fixation in the population with probability $f_B$ from its
initial frequency of $\nicefrac{1}{2N}$. This fixation probability may
be much higher than that of neutral mutations, but still much less than
$1$. The expected total rate of non-synonymous substitutions is
$$dN= (1-C - B) \mu  +   (2 N \mu B) \times  f_B.$$ Then
$$\dNdS = (1-C-B) +  2 N B f_B \label{eqn:dNDS_C_B}$$ assuming again
that all synonymous mutations are neutral. Note that this means that our
estimates of $C$ using $1-\dNdS$ will be a lower bound on the true
constraint if even a small fraction of mutations are beneficial. Those
cases where the gene is evolving more rapidly at the protein level than
at synonymous sites, i.e. $d_N/d_S > 1$, are potentially strong
candidates for positive selection rapidly driving change at the protein
level. We can identify genes that have $\dNdS$ significantly greater
than one, either on the complete gene phylogeny, or on particular
branches. Note that is a very conservative test that few genes in the
genome meet, as many genes that are fixing adaptive non-synonymous
substitutions will have $\dNdS<1$; even if adaptive mutations are
common, genes may still evolve in a constrained way (i.e. $\dNdS<1$) if
the rapid fixation of beneficial mutations due to positive selection is
outweighed by the loss of non-synonymous mutations to negative
selection.

::: center
![A phylogram for the primate *lysozyme* gene, data from @Yang:98. For
each branch, the numbers give the estimated average number of
non-synonymous to synonymous changes in the lysozyme
protein.](Journal_figs/genetic_drift/Yang_lysozyme/Yang_lysozyme.pdf){#fig:lysozyme
width="0.8 \\textwidth"}
:::

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/Colobus/19792029373_fcce706e67_k.jpg){width="0.8 \\textwidth"}
:::
:::

A classic example for looking at adaptive evolution using $\dNdS$ is the
evolution of the *lysozyme* gene in primates [@Messier:97; @Yang:98].
The lysozyme protein is a key component for the breakdown of bacterial
walls. The *lysozyme* gene shows very fast protein evolution (see the
phylogeny in Figure [1.6](#fig:lysozyme){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:lysozyme"}), notably on the lineages leading to apes
(e.g. gibbons and humans) and Colobines (e.g. colobus and langur
monkeys). Colobines have leaf-based diets. They digest these leaves by
bacterial fermentation in their foregut, and then use lysozymes to break
down the bacteria to extract energy from the leaves. In Colobines, the
lysozyme protein has evolved to work well in the high-PH environment of
the stomach. Remarkably, the Colobine lysozyme protein has convergently
evolved this activity via very similar amino-acid changes at 5 key
residuals in cows and Hoatzins [a leaf eating bird,
@kornegay1994molecular]

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/Hoatzin/14747388314_85798ba97e_z.jpg){width="0.8  \\textwidth"}
:::
:::

##### The McDonald-Kreitman test

As noted above, a big issue with using $\dNdS$ to detect adaptation is
that it is very conservative. For a more powerful test of rapid
divergence, what we need to do is adjust for the level of constraint a
gene experiences at non-synonymous sites. One way to do this is to use
polymorphism data as an internal control. If we see little
non-synonymous polymorphism at a gene, but a lot of synonymous
polymorphism, we now know that there is likely strong constraint on the
gene (i.e. high $C$), thus we expect $\dNdS$ to be low. @mcdonald:91
devised a simple test of the neutral theory of molecular evolution at a
gene based on this intuition [building on the conceptually similar HKA
test @hudson1987test]. @mcdonald:91 took the case where we have
polymorphism data at a gene for one species and divergence to a closely
related species. They partitioned polymorphism and fixed differences in
their sample into the number of non-synonymous and synonymous changes:

::: center
                Poly.       Fixed
  ---------- ----------- -----------
   Non-Syn.     $P_N$       $D_N$
     Syn.       $P_S$       $D_S$
    Ratio     $P_N/P_S$   $D_N/D_S$
:::

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](figures/Coalescent/MK_tree.pdf){width="\\textwidth"}
:::
:::

Under neutral theory, we expect a smaller number of non-synonymous to
synonymous fixed differences ($D_N/D_S < 1$) and exactly the same
expectation holds for polymorphism ($P_N/P_S$). Let's consider a gene
with $L_S$ and $L_N$ sites where synonymous and non-synonymous mutations
could arise respectively. We can think of the underlying gene genealogy
at our gene, see Figure
[\[fig:MK_tree\]](#fig:MK_tree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MK_tree"}, with the total time on the coalescent
genealogy within the species as $T_{tot}$ and the total time for fixed
differences between our species as $T_{div}'$, note that $T_{div}'$ is
the total time where a an allele that would appear as a subsitution
could arise. Then under neutrality we expect $\mu L_N (1-C) T_{tot}$
non-synonymous polymorphisms (i.e. our number of segregating sites), and
$\mu L_N (1-C) T_{div}'$ non-synonymous fixed differences. We can then
fill out the rest of our table as follows:

::: center
                       Poly.                      Fixed
  ---------- ------------------------- ---------------------------
   Non-Syn.   $\mu L_N (1-C) T_{tot}$   $\mu L_N (1-C)  T_{div}'$
     Syn.        $\mu L_S T_{tot}$         $\mu L_S T_{div}'$
    Ratio        $L_N(1-C)/( L_S)$        $L_N (1-C) / ( L_S)$
:::

Therefore, we expect the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous changes
to be the same for polymorphism and divergence under a strict neutral
model. We can test this expectation of equal ratios via the standard
tests of a $2
\times 2$ table. If the ratio of $N/S$ is significantly higher for
divergence than polymorphism we have evidence that non-synonymous
substitutions are accumulating more rapidly than we would predict given
levels of constraint alone.

As example of a Mcdonald-Kreitman (MK) table consider the work of
@frentiu2007adaptive on the molecular evolution of L photopigment opsin
in admiral (*Limenitis*) butterflies, responsible for colour vision in
the long-wavelength part of the visual spectrum. @frentiu2007adaptive
found that the sensitivity of this opsin had shifted towards blue in its
sensitivity in *L. archippus archippus* (viceroy) compared to *L.
arthemis astyanax*. To test whether this molecular evolution reflected
positive selection they sequenced 24 *L. arthemis astyanax* individuals
and one *L. archippus archippus* sequence. They identified 11
polymorphic sites in *L. arthemis astyanax* and 16 fixed differences,
which break down as follows:

::: marginfigure
::: center
![image](illustration_images/Genetic_drift/Basilarchia_arthemis_archippus/Basilarchia_arthemis_archippus.png){width="\\textwidth"}
:::
:::

::: center
                    Poly.               Fixed
  ---------- ------------------- -------------------
   Non-Syn.          $2$                $12$
     Syn.            $9$                 $4$
    Ratio     $\nicefrac{2}{9}$   $\nicefrac{3}{1}$
:::

Note the strong excess of non-synonymous to synonymous divergence
compared to polymorphism (p-value of $0.006$, Fisher's exact test),
which is consistent with the gene evolving in an adaptive manner among
the two species. We would expect roughly only $3$ non-synonymous
substitutions out of 16 substitutions if the gene was evolving neutrally
($16 \times \nicefrac{2}{11}$).

::: ChapterSummary
In a diploid population of size $N$, any of a set of $2N$ selectively
equivalent (ie neutral) alleles are equally likely to be the ancestor of
the entire population at some future distant time point. Therefore, the
probability that a new mutation eventually fixes in the population is
$\nicefrac{1}{2N}$.

Under a model where a fraction $C$ of new mutations are neutral and
$1-C$ mutations are strongly deleterious, $2NC\mu$ mutations arise every
generation that can possibly become substitutions. Therefore, the
per-generation rate of neutral substitution is $2N(1-C)\mu
    \times \nicefrac{1}{2N} = (1-C)\mu$. This is independent of the
population size and just depends on levels of constraint and mutation
rates.

The constant rate of neutral substitution gives rise to a per-generation
molecular clock, which can potentially be used to estimate constraint
($C$) and mutation rates.

Many summaries and tests of molecular evolution, e.g. $\dNdS$, are based
on comparing rates of substitution between functional classes of sites.
These allow differing levels of constraint to be identified and signals
of adaptive substitution to be detected.

Tests of molecular evolution for adaptation that also incorporate both
divergence and polymorphism, e.g. the Mcdonald-Kreitman test, are
potentially powerful tools as polymorphism levels allow a somewhat
independent measure of levels of constraint.
:::

::: question
Assuming that the mutation rate is $\mu$/gamete/generation and the
population size is N diploid individuals, what is the number of new
mutations introduced into the population each generation?
:::

::: question
What is the probability of fixation of a unique new, neutral mutation in
a population of N haploid individuals?
:::

::: question
Why is dN/dS much less than one for the majority of genes in our genome?
:::

::: question
You sequence a gene in *Drosophila melanogaster* and *D. simulans*. You
observe 5 non-synonymous substitutions out of 500 bases where
non-synonymous substitutions could occur, and 15 synonymous
substitutions out of 500 bases where synonymous substitutions could
occur. What is the level of constraint at nonsynonymous sites?
:::

::: question
Analyzing polymorphism and divergence data for a gene, you calculate the
following McDonald-Kreitman table.

  ---------------- ----------- -------
                   Polymorp.   Fixed
  Synonymous       40          80
  Non-synonymous   20          80
  ---------------- ----------- -------

\
**A)** Based on the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous polymorphisms,
and given the 80 synonymous substitutions, how many nonsynymous
substitutions would you expect if this gene were evolving neutrally?\
**B)** Is this table consistent with the gene evolving neutrally? If not
what could explain the results?
:::
