# Introduction

````{margin}
– {cite:t}`DobzhanskyBook`
````

*"BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION IS THE CHANGE OVER TIME IN THE GENETIC COMPOSITION OF A POPULATION."* Our population is made up of a set of interbreeding individuals, the genetic composition of which is made up of the genomes that each individual carries. The genetic composition of the population alters due to the death of individuals or the migration of individuals in or out of the population. If our individuals vary in the number of children they have, this also alters the genetic composition of the population in the next generation. Every new individual born into the population subtly changes the genetic composition of the population. Their genome is a unique combination of their parents' genomes, having been shuffled by segregation and recombination during meioses, and possibly changed by mutation. These individual events seem minor at the level of the population, but it is the accumulation of small changes in aggregate across individuals and generations that is the stuff of evolution. It is the compounding of these small changes over tens, hundreds, and millions of generations that drives the amazing diversity of life that has emerged on this earth.

Population genetics is the study of the genetic composition of natural populations and its evolutionary causes and consequences. Quantitative genetics is the study of the genetic basis of phenotypic variation and how phenotypic changes evolve over time. Both fields are closely conceptually aligned as we'll see throughout these notes. They seek to describe how the genetic and phenotypic composition of populations can be changed over time by the forces of mutation, recombination, selection, migration, and genetic drift. To understand how these forces interact, it is helpful to develop simple theoretical models to help our intuition. In these notes we will work through these models and summarize the major areas of population- and quantitative-genetic theory.

````{margin}
“All models are wrong but some are useful.” - {cite:t}`box:79`.
````

While the models we will develop will seem naı̈ve, and indeed they are, they are nonetheless incredibly useful and powerful. Throughout the course we will see that these simple models often yield accurate predictions, such that much of our understanding of the process of evolution is built on these models. We will also see how these models are incredibly useful for understanding real patterns we see in the evolution of phenotypes and genomes, such that much of our analysis of evolution, in a range of areas from human medical genetics to conservation, is based on these models. Therefore, population and quantitative genetics are key to understanding various applied questions, from how medical genetics identifies the genes involved in disease to how we preserve species from extinction.

````{margin}
See {cite:t}`provine1986geneticists` for a history of early population genetics. Provine, W. B., 2001 The origins of theoretical population genetics: with a new afterword. University of Chicago Press
````

Population genetics emerged from early efforts to reconcile Mendelian genetics with Darwinian thought. Part of the power of population genetics comes from the fact that the basic rules of transmission genetics are simple and nearly universal. One of the truly remarkable things about population genetics is that many of the important ideas and mathematical models emerged before the 1940s, long before the mechanistic-basis of inheritance (DNA) was discovered, and yet the usefulness of these models has not diminished. This is a testament to the fact that the models are established on a very solid foundation, building from the basic rules of genetic transmission combined with simple mathematical and statistical models.

Much of this early work traces to the ideas of R.A. Fisher, Sewall Wright, and J.B.S. Haldane, who, along with many others, described the early principals and mathematical models underlying our understanding of the evolution of populations. Building on this conceptual fusion of genetics and evolution, there followed a flourishing of evolutionary thought, the modern evolutionary synthesis, combining these ideas with those from the study of speciation, biodiversity, and paleontology. In total, this work showed that both short-term evolutionary change and the long-term evolution of biodiversity could be well understood through the gradual accumulation of evolutionary change within and among populations. This evolutionary synthesis continues to this day, combining new insights from genomics, phylogenetics, ecology, and developmental biology.

````{margin}
“{cite:t}`DobzhanskyBook` once defined evolution as ’a change in the genetic com- position of the populations’ an epigram that should not be mistaken for the claim that everything worth saying about evolution is contained in statements about genes.” – {cite:t}`lewontin01`
````

Population and quantitative genetics are a necessary but not sufficient description of evolution; it is only by combining the insights of many fields that a rich and comprehensive picture of evolution emerges. We certainly do not need to know the genes underlying the displays of the birds of paradise to study how the divergence of these displays, due to sexual selection, may drive speciation. Indeed, as we'll see in our discussion of quantitative genetics, we can predict how populations respond to selection, including sexual selection and assortative mating, without any knowledge of the loci involved. Nor do we need to know the precise selection pressures and the ordering of genetic changes to study the emergence of the tetrapod body plan. We do not necessarily need to know all the genetic details to appreciate the beauty of these, and many other, evolutionary case studies. However, every student of biology gains from understanding the basics of population and quantitative genetics, allowing them to base their studies on a solid bedrock of understanding of the processes that underpin all evolutionary change.

## Genetics, Eugenics, and Scientific Racism

````{margin}
This is a complex historical topic, with many geneticists adopting differ- ent, sometimes conflicting positions over their lifetimes as their views and those of society changed. I cite both the primary genetics literature and historical analysis (where available).
````

The history of genetics and evolutionary biology is intertwined with the history of eugenics and scientific racism. Francis Galton, one of the first people to systematically study human inheritance, coined the term "eugenics" in 1883 to describe the idea of 'human improvement' through controlled breeding of humans {cite}`galton1883inquiries`. Historically, eugenics is much more than just the idea that selection through breeding would work in humans; it is the idea that particular people are "genetically inferior" and therefore "unfit" to reproduce {cite}`paul2014wrong`. Eugenicists' obsession with human worth and genetic inferiority also meant that eugenicists also often held that people from some races and ethnicities are genetically superior to others. Thus, ideas about eugenics also built on older racist fields of science that sought to classify humans into a discrete racial hierarchy, while in parallel scientists in these fields were forcing ideas from genetics and evolution into an essentialist view of race. These deeply flawed hierarchies have frequently been used by the powerful to justify subjugating and disenfranchising minorities and Indigenous people.

Although eugenics is often correctly associated with the Nazi party and the Holocaust, eugenic ideas and eugenic policies were also widespread in the US and UK during the 1920s and 1930s and sometimes aligned with progressive causes of that era {cite}`paul1984eugenics,kevles1995name`. Eugenic ideas were also implemented as policy ---with horrific consequences---in a number of countries. Immigration policies based explicitly on eugenic arguments were put in place in the US from the 1920s until their repeal in the 1950s and 60s. These policies strongly favoured immigration from Northern Europe and were a deliberate action to restrict or bar immigration from Asia and eastern and southern Europe based on xenophobic, racist, and anti-Semitic views {cite}`okrent2020guarded`. During the 20th Century, many US states passed eugenics sterilization laws {cite}`reilly2015eugenics`, that in practice were often targeted against Black, Latino, and Indigenous people {cite}`hansen2013sterilized`. For example, the state of California from 1919 to 1972 used eugenics ideas to justify the sterilization of 20,000 people who had been labelled unfit and mentally defective, a disproportionate number of whom were Latino {cite}`stern2017california,novak2018disproportionate`

Many early geneticists during this time were proponents of eugenics and many supported racist views in their genetics research. One notable example is R.A. Fisher, who we'll encounter throughout this book. Fisher is arguably the father of much of evolutionary genetics and modern statistics, having made huge contributions to the foundations of both fields. He pursued these fields in part because of his eugenic interests and concerns about the "genetically inferiority" of the lower classes {cite}`norton1983fisher.mazumdar2005eugenics_fisher`. For example, he devoted a number of the later chapters in his classic evolutionary genetics book to eugenics {cite}`fisher1930`. He was hardly alone in his views, with many prominent geneticists lending their voices to eugenic and racist arguments. Indeed, many famous genetics institutions grew from roots in eugenics. For example, the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory hosted a large Eugenics Record Office, and prior to 1954, the journal Annals of Human Genetics was called Annals of Eugenics. Scientists and their institutions strongly shaped the eugenic views and policies of their time and at times bent science to lend support to their racist views. Given their lasting contributions to our field, we should not shy away from reading and discussing their work. But despite their scientific accomplishments, we should resist the urge to celebrate or idolize them. We should also guard against inheriting their thinking by continually questioning the frameworks and language they put in place.

From its inception, geneticists have also been central to movements against eugenics and scientific racism on scientific as well as moral grounds. For instance, Thomas Hunt Morgan and Lancelot Hogben were both prominent geneticists who argued that eugenicists failed to recognize the environmental and social causes of inequality {cite}`hogben1933nature,tabery2008ra,allen2011eugenics`. These arguments thread into later debates, where geneticists pushed back on simplistic and erroneous claims about genetics, IQ and behavioural differences among human populations {cite}`dobzhansky1961bogus,lewontin1970race,paul1994dobzhansky`. Population geneticists have also been central to the pushback against scientific racism, highlighting the close genetic relationships among all humans due to their recent common ancestry and the ephemeral nature of populations {cite}`united1952race,lewontin1972apportionment,provine1986geneticists,gannett2013theodosius`. Racists continue to advance a selective view of population-genetic results to further their ends. As scientists, it is too easy to claim that we are just interested in the facts and ignore others who seek to present a distorted view of the science to advance their own political and social agendas. It is our job as population geneticists to argue against misuse of our field. As human genomics and personal genomics rise in prominence, we also need to resist public adoption of genetic determinism and essentialist, racialized thinking. We must question the topics we choose to investigate, the assumptions we make, and the conversations we prioritize as a field. Through exploring our own biases and those embedded in the presentation and use of our field, we can help to combat the misrepresentations of genetics and evolution that continue to cause harm in our society.